 
 Hannah Arendt's Communications Concept of Power

Author(s): JÜRGEN HABERMAS and  Thomas McCarthy
Source: Social Research, Vol. 44, No. 1, Hannah Arendt (SPRING 1977), pp. 3-24
Published by: The Johns Hopkins University Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/40970268
Accessed: 04-12-2024 20:25 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a widerange of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity andfacilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available athttps://about.jstor.org/terms

Hannah Arendt'sCommunicationsConcept of .Power /BY JURGEN HABERMASIVIax Weber defined (Macht) as the possibility of forc-ing one's own will on the behavior of others. Hannah Arendt,on the contrary, understands power as the ability to agreeupon a common course of action in unconstrained communi-cation. Both represent power as a potency that is actualized inactions, but each takes a different model of action as a basis."Power" in Max Weber,Talcott Parsons, and Hannah ArendtMax Weber takes the teleological model of action as hispoint of departure: an individual subject (or a group that canbe regarded as an individual) chooses the appropriate meansto realize a goal that it has set for itself. Goal-attainment orsuccess consists in bringing about a state in the world thatfulfills the goal in question. To the extent that his successdepends on the behavior of another subject, the actor musthave at his disposal the means to instigate the other to thedesired behavior. Weber calls this disposition over means toinfluence the will of another "power." Hannah Arendt re-serves for it the term "force" (Gewalt). The purposive-rationalactor, who is interested only in the success of his action, mustdispose of means with which he can compel a subject capableScanned Page Image p. [3]

4 SOCIAL RESEARCHof choice, whether by the threat of sanctions, by persuasion, orby a clever channeling of choices. As Weber puts it: "Powermeans every chance within a social relationship to assert one'swill even against opposition."1 The only alternative to coercion(Zwang) exercised by one side against the other is free agree-ment among participants. But the teleological model of actionprovides only for actors who are oriented to their own successand not to reaching agreement. It admits of agreement pro-cesses only to the extent to which they appear to the partici-pants as means for attaining their respective goals. But anagreement of this sort, which is pursued one-sidedly with theproviso of being instrumental for one's own success, is notmeant seriously; it does not fulfill the conditions of a consen-sus brought about without constraint.Hannah Arendt starts from another model of action, thecommunicative:Power corresponds to the human ability not just to act but to actin concert. Power is never the property of an individual; itbelongs to a group and remains in existence only so long as thegroup keeps together. When we say of somebody that he is "inpower" we actually refer to his being empowered by a certainnumber of people to act in their name.2The fundamental phenomenon of power is not the in-strumentalization of another's will, but the formation of a com-mon will in a communication directed to reaching agreement.This could, of course, be understood in such a way that"power" and "force" merely designate two different aspects ofthe same exercise of political rule. "Power" would then meanthe consent of the governed that is mobilized for collectivegoals, that is, their readiness to support the political leader-i Max Weber, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, 2 vols. (Tubingen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1925) ,1: 16, 2: 1. Parsons distinguishes four types of exercise of power: persuasion, activationof commitments, inducement, coercion. Cf. Talcott Parsons, "On the Concept ofPolitical Power," in his Sociological Theory and Modern Society (New York: Free Press,1967), pp. 310 ff.2 Hannah Arendt, On Violence (New York: Harcourt, brace 6c worm, iy/u;, p. **.Scanned Page Image p. 4

COMMUNICATIONS 5ship; while "force" would mean the disposition over resourcesand means of coercion, in virtue of which a political leader-ship makes and carries through binding decisions in order torealize collective goals. This idea has in fact inspired thesystems-theoretic concept of power.Talcott Parsons understands by power the general capacityof a social system "to get things done in the interest of collec-tive goals."3 The mobilization of consent produces the powerwhich is transformed into binding decisions through the ex-ploitation of social resources.4 Parsons can bring the twophenomena which Arendt contrasts as power and force underone unified concept of power because he understands poweras the property of a system which behaves toward its owncomponents according to the same schema that characterizesthe behavior of the purposive-rational actor toward the exter-nal world: "I have defined power as the capacity of a socialsystem to mobilize resources to attain collective goals."5 Herepeats at the level of systems theory the same teleologicalconcept of power (as the potential to realize goals) that Weberpursued at the level of action theory. In both cases, what isspecific to the power of unifying speech, what separates itfrom force, is lost. The power of agreement-oriented com-munication to produce consensus is opposed to this force,because seriously intended agreement is an end in itself andcannot be instrumentalized for other ends.The agreement of those who take counsel together in orderto act in common - "an opinion upon which many publicly arein agreement"6 - signifies power insofar as it rests on convic-3 Talcott Parsons, "Authority, Legitimation and Political Action," in his Structure andProcess in Modern Societies (Glencoe, 111.: Free Press, 1960), p. 181.4 Talcott Parsons, "Voting and the Equilibrium of the American Political System,"in Sociological Theory and Modern Society, pp. 224-225: "The amount of its power is anattribute of the total system and is a function of several variables. These are thesupport that can be mobilized by those exercising power, the facilities they have accessto (notably the control of the productivity of the economy), and the legitimation thatcan be accorded to the position of the holders of power . . . ."5Ibid.t p. 193.6 Hannah Arendt, On Revolution (New York: Viking Press, 1963), p. 71.Scanned Page Image p. 5

6 SOCIAL RESEARCHtion and thus on that peculiarly forceless force with whichinsights assert themselves. Let us attempt to clarify this. Thestrength of a consensus brought about in unconstrained com-munication is not measured against any success but against theclaim to rational validity that is immanent in speech. Ofcourse, a conviction that is formed in the give and take ofpublic discussion can also be manipulated; but even successfulmanipulation must take rationality claims into account. Weallow ourselves to be convinced of the truth of a statement, theTightness of a norm, the veracity of an utterance; the authen-ticity of our conviction stands and falls with belief, that is, withthe consciousness that the recognition of those validity claimsis rationally motivated. Convictions can be manipulated, butnot the rationality claim from which they subjectively drawtheir force.In short, the communicatively produced power of commonconvictions originates in the fact that those involved areoriented to reaching agreement and not primarily to theirrespective individual successes. It is based on the fact that theydo not use language "perlocutionarily," merely to instigateother subjects to a desired behavior, but "illocutionarily," thatis, for the noncoercive establishment of intersubjective rela-tions. Hannah Arendt disconnects the concept of power fromthe teleological model; power is built up in communicativeaction; it is a collective effect of speech in which reachingagreement is an end in itself for all those involved. If, how-ever, power is no longer thought of as a potential for realizinggoals, if it is not actualized in purposive-rational action, thenin what is it expressed, and for what can it be used?Hannah Arendt regards the development of power as anend in itself. Power serves to maintain the praxis from which itsprings. It becomes consolidated and embodied in politicalinstitutions which secure those very forms of life that arecentered in reciprocal speech. Power therefore manifests itself(a) in orders that protect liberty, (b) in resistance against forcesScanned Page Image p. 6

COMMUNICATIONS 7that threaten political liberty, and (c) in those revolutionaryactions that found new institutions of liberty.It is the people's support that lends power to the institutions ofa country, and this support is but the continuation of the con-sent that brought the laws into existence to begin with. . . . Allpolitical institutions are manifestations and materializations ofpower; they petrify and decay as soon as the living power of thepeople ceases to uphold them. This is what Madison meantwhen he said "all government rests on opinion," a word no lesstrue for the various forms of monarchy than for democracies.7It becomes clear at this point that the communications con-cept of power also has a normative content. Is such a conceptscientifically useful? Is it at all suited to descriptive purposes? Iwill try to answer this question in several steps. I will first showhow Hannah Arendt introduces and grounds her concept.Then I would like to offer a reminder of how she employs it.Finally, I want to deal with a few weaknesses in the concept; inmy view these derive less from its normative status than fromthe fact that Arendt remains bound to the historical andconceptual constellation of classical Greek philosophy.The Structure of Unimpaired IntersubjectivityHannah Arendt's principal philosophical work, The HumanCondition (1958), serves to systematically renew the Aristotelianconcept of praxis. The author does not rely on an exegesis ofclassical texts; she drafts an anthropology of communicativeaction - a counterpart to Arnold Gehlen's anthropology ofpurposeful action (Der Mensch, 1940, 1950). Whereas Gehlenexamines the behavioral circuit of instrumental action as themost important reproductive mechanism of the species,Arendt analyzes the form of intersubjectivity generated in the7 Arendt, On Violence, p. 41.Scanned Page Image p. 7

8 SOCIAL RESEARCHpraxis of speech as the basic feature of cultural life. Com-municative action is the medium in which the intersubjectivelyshared life-world is formed. It is the "space of appearance" inwhich actors enter, encounter one another, are seen andheard. The spatial dimension of the life-world is determinedby the "fact of human plurality": every interaction unifies themultiple perspectives of perception and action of those pres-ent, who as individuals occupy an inconvertible standpoint.The temporal dimension of the life-world is determined bythe "fact of human natality": the birth of every individualmeans the possibility of a new beginning; to act means to beable to seize the initiative and to do the unanticipated. Fur-thermore, the life-world is essentially charged with securingindividual and group identity in social space and historicaltime. In communication, individuals appear actively as uniquebeings and reveal themselves in their subjectivity. At the sametime they must recognize one another as equally responsiblebeings, that is, as beings capable of intersubjective agreement- the rationality claim immanent in speech grounds a radicalequality. Finally, the life-world itself is filled, so to speak, withpraxis, with the "web of human relationships." This comprisesthe stories in which actors are involved as doers and sufferers.8One may regard the method with which Hannah Arendtdevelops her practical philosophy - a method reminiscent ofAlfred Schutz's social phenomenology - as inadequate; but theintention is clear: she wants to read off of the formal proper-ties of communcative action (or praxis) the general structuresof an unimpaired intersubjectivity. These structures set theconditions of normalcy for human existence, indeed for anexistence worthy of human beings. Owing to its innovativepotential, the domain of praxis is, however, highly unstableand in need of protection. In societies organized around astate, this is looked after by political institutions. These are fedby the power that springs from unimpaired intersubjectivity;8 Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,1958), pp. 181 ff.Scanned Page Image p. 8

COMMUNICATIONS 9and they must in turn protect the susceptible structures ofintersubjectivity against deformations if they are not them-selves to deteriorate. From this follows the central hypothesisthat Hannah Arendt untiringly repeats: no political leadershipcan with impunity replace power through force; and it cangain power only from a nondeformed public realm. Thepublic-political realm has also been conceived by others as agenerator, if not of power then of the legitimation of power;but Hannah Arendt insists that a public-political realm canproduce legitimate power only so long as structures of nondis-torted communication find their expression in it.What first undermines and then kills political communities isloss of power and final impotence; and power cannot be storedup and kept in reserve for emergencies, like the instruments ofviolence, but exists only in actualization. Where power is notactualized, it passes away, and history is full of examples that thegreatest material riches cannot compensate for this loss. Poweris actualized only where word and deed have not parted com-pany, where words are not empty and deeds not brutal, wherewords are not used to violate and destroy but to establish rela-tions and create new realities. Power is what keeps the publicrealm, the potential space of appearance between acting andspeaking men, in existence.9Some Applications ofthe Communications Concept of PowerHannah Arendt does not test her hypothesis against exam-ples of the decline of great empires. Her historical investiga-tions resolve instead around two extreme cases: the destruc-tion of political liberty under totalitarian rule (a), and therevolutionary establishment of political liberty (b).10 Both in-vestigations apply the concept of power, and in such a waythat the deformations in Western mass democracies are il-luminated from opposite sides.9Ibid., p. 200.10 Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (New York: Harcourt, Brace,1951); Arendt, On Revolution.Scanned Page Image p. 9

10 SOCIAL RESEARCH(a) Every political order that isolates its citizens from oneanother through mistrust, and cuts off the public exchange ofopinions, degenerates to a rule based on violence. It destroysthe communicative structures in which alone power can origi-nate. Fear heightened to terror forces each to shut himself offfrom every other; at the same time it destroys the distancesbetween individuals. It takes from them the power of initiativeand robs their interaction of its power to spontaneously unifywhat is separated: "pressed together with everyone, each istotally isolated from all."11 The totalitarian rule which HannahArendt examines in the cases of Nazism and Stalinism is notonly a modern version of classical tyrannies; if it were, it wouldmerely silence the communicative movement of the publicrealm. Its specific achievement, however, is precisely themobilization of depoliticized masses:On the one hand, the police state destroys all relations betweenmen that still remain after the discontinuance of the public-political sphere; on the other hand, it demands that those whohave been fully isolated and forsaken by one another be able tobe brought into political actions (although naturally not togenuine political action). . . . Totalitarian rule does not only robmen of their capacity to act; rather, with inexorable consistency,it makes them - as if they were really only a single man - intoaccomplices in all actions undertaken and crimes committed bythe totalitarian regime.12The totalitarian rule of the Nazi regime historically arose onthe basis of a mass democracy. This is one of the occasionsthat motivated Hannah Arendt to a vigorous critique of theprivatism built into modern societies. Whereas the theorists ofdemocratic elitism (following Schumpeter) commend repre-sentative government and the party system as channels for thepolitical participation of a depoliticized mass, Arendt sees thedanger precisely in this situation. Mediatizing the population11 Hannah Arendt, Elemente und Ursprunge totaler Herrschaft (Frankfurt:Europaische Verlagsanstalt, 1955), p. 745. Cf. Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism,part 3.12 Arendt, Elemente und Ursprunge totaler Herrschaft, p. 749.Scanned Page Image p. 10

COMMUNICATIONS 11through highly bureaucratized administrations, parties, andorganizations just supplements and fortifies those privatisticforms of life which provide the psychological base for mobiliz-ing the unpolitical, that is, for establishing totalitarian rule.1313 On this insight is based the thesis of the banality of evil which Arendt illustratedin the case of Eichmann (Hannah Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem [New York: VikingPress, 1963]). It can already be found in an essay on "Organized Guilt," written in1944 and published immediately after the war in Die Wandlung; an English translationappeared in Jewish Frontier, January 1945: "Heinrich Himmler does not belong tothose intellectuals who come from the dark no-man's-land between bohemian and'five- penny' existence, and whose significance for the formation of the Nazi elite hasrecently been pointed out again and again. He is neither a bohemian like Goebbels,nor a sex criminal like Streicher, nor a perverted fanatic like Hitler, nor an adven-turer like Goring. He is a 'Babbitt' with all the appearance of respectability, with allthe habits of the good family man, who does not cheat on his wife and who wants tosecure a decent future for his children. And he consciously built up his newestorganization of terror, which encompasses the entire country, on the assumption thatmost men are not bohemians, not fanatics, not adventurers, not sex criminals and notsadists, but in the first place 'jobholders' and good family men. I think it was Peguywho called the family man the 'grand adventurier du 20e siecle'; he died too soon toexperience in him the great criminal of the century. We have been so accustomed toadmiring or smiling at the good-natured solicitude of the family man, the seriousconcentration on the welfare of the family, the solemn commitment to devote his lifeto wife and children, that we scarcely perceived how the caring father, who wasconcerned above all for security, was transformed against his will, under the pressureof the chaotic economic conditions of our time, into an adventurer who with all hisanxiety could never be sure of the next day. His pliability was already demonstratedin the homogenization at the start of the regime. It turned out that he was willing tosacrifice conscience, honor and human dignity for the sake of pension, life-insurance,the secure existence of wife and children" (Hannah Arendt, Die verborgene Tradition[Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1976], pp. 40 ff).It is this insight which turned both Hannah Arendt and her teacher, Karl Jaspers,in spite of their unmistakably elitist mentality, into intrepid radical democrats. HowArendt conceived the peculiar connection of participatory democracy with the elitiststructures that she regarded as necessary, is revealed in the following passage (inwhich she is speaking of the Ratesystem, the system of Soviets or councils): "It wouldbe tempting to spin out further the potentialities of the councils, but it certainly iswiser to say with Jefferson, 'Begin them only for a single purpose; they will soon showfor what others they are the best instruments' - the best instruments, for example, forbreaking up the modern mass society, with its dangerous tendency toward the forma-tion of pseudo-political mass movements, or rather, the best, the most natural way forinterspersing it at the grass roots with an 'elite' that is chosen by no one, butconstitutes itself. The joys of public happiness and the responsibilities for publicbusiness would then become the share of those few from all walks of life who have ataste for public freedom and cannot be 'happy' without it. Politically, they are thebest, and it is the task of good government and the sign of a well-ordered republic toassure them of their rightful place in the public realm. To be sure, such an "aristocra-Scanned Page Image p. 11

12 SOCIAL RESEARCHThomas Jefferson, the radical democrat among the fathers ofthe American constitution, already hadat least a foreboding of how dangerous it might be to allow thepeople a share in public power without providing them at thesame time with more public space than the ballot box and withmore opportunity to make their voices heard in public thanelection day. What he perceived to be the mortal danger to therepublic was that the Constitution had given all power to thecitizens, without giving them the opportunity of being republi-cans and of acting as citizens. In other words, the danger wasthat all power had been given to the people in their privatecapacity, and that there was no space established for them intheir capacity of being citizens.14(b) Therein lies the motif that inspired Hannah Arendt toher investigations of the bourgeois revolutions of theeighteenth century, the Hungarian uprising of 1956, and thecivil disobedience and student protests of the sixties. In con-nection with emancipatory movements she is interested in thepower of common conviction: the withdrawal of obedience toinstitutions that have lost their legitimacy; the confrontation ofcommunicative power with the means of force of a coercivebut impotent state apparatus; the beginnings of a new politicalorder and the attempt - the pathos of the new beginning - tohold fast to the initial revolutionary situation, to give institu-tional permanence to the communicative generation of power.tic' form of government would spell the end of general suffrage as we understand ittoday; for only those who as voluntary members of an 'elementary republic' havedemonstrated that they care for more than their private happiness and are concernedabout the state of the world would have the right to be heard in the conduct of thebusiness of the republic. However, this exclusion from politics should not be deroga-tory, since a political elite is by no means identical with a social or cultural orprofessional elite. The exclusion, moreover, would not depend on an outside body; ifthose who belong are self-chosen, those who do not belong are self-excluded. Andsuch self-exclusion, far from being arbitrary discrimination, would in fact give sub-stance and reality to one of the most important negative liberties we have enjoyedsince the end of the ancient world, namely freedom from politics, which was unknownto Rome or Athens and which is politically perhaps the most relevant part of ourChristian heritage" (On Revolution, pp. 283 ff).14 Arendt, On Revolution, p. 256.Scanned Page Image p. 12

COMMUNICATIONS 13It is fascinating to see how Hannah Arendt traces the samephenomenon over and over. When revolutionaries seize thepower that lies in the streets; when a populace committed topassive resistance confronts alien tanks with their bare hands;when convinced minorities contest the legitimacy of existinglaws and organize civil disobedience; when the "pure desirefor action" manifests itself in the student movement - thesephenomona confirm again that no one really possesses power;it "springs up between men when they act together and van-ishes the moment they disperse."15 This emphatic concept ofpraxis is more Marxist than Aristotelian; Marx called it"critical-revolutionary activity."Arendt identifies attempts to institutionalize direct democ-racy in the American town meetings around 1776, in thesoci'et'es populaires in Paris between 1789 and 1793, in the sec-tions of the Paris Commune of 1871, in the Russian Soviets in1903 and 1917, and in the Rdtedemokratie in Germany in 1918.She sees in these different forms the only serious attempts at aconstitution of liberty under the conditions of modern masssociety. She traces their failure to the political defeats of therevolutionary labor movement and to the economic success ofthe unions and labor parties:. . . with the transformation of a class society into a mass societyand with the substitution of a guaranteed annual wage for dailyor weekly pay . . . the workers today are no longer outside ofsociety; they are its members, and they are jobholders likeeverybody else. The political significance of the labor movementis now the same as that of any other pressure group.16The Limits of Classical TheoryIn the context in which it stands, this thesis reads a bit toosmoothly; it is not a result of well balanced investigations but15 Arendt, The Human Condition, p. 200.16 Ibid., p. 219.Scanned Page Image p. 13

14 SOCIAL RESEARCHissues from a philosophical construction. So far I have tried topresent what I take as strong aspects and promising applica-tions of Arendt's concept of power. Now I would like to addsome comments on its weaknesses.Arendt stylizes the image she has of the Greek polis to theessence of politics as such. This is the background to herfavored conceptual dichotomies between the public and theprivate, between state and economy, freedom and welfare,political-practical activity and production - rigid dichotomieswhich modern bourgeois society and the modern state, how-ever, escape. Thus the mere fact that in modern times some-thing characteristically new, a complementary relationship be-tween state and economy, established itself with the develop-ment of the capitalist mode of production already counts asthe mark of a pathology, of a destructive confusion:In the modern world the social and the political realms aremuch less distinct. . . . The functionalization [of politics] makesit impossible to perceive any serious gulf between the two realms;and this is not a matter of a theory or an ideology, sincewith the rise of society, that is, the rise of the "household" (oikia)or of economic activities to the public realm, housekeeping andall matters pertaining formerly to the private sphere of thefamily have become a "collective" concern. In the modernworld, the two realms indeed constantly flow into each otherlike the waves in the never-resting stream of the life processitself.17Arendt rightly insists that the technical-economic overcom-ing of poverty is by no means a sufficient condition for thepractical securing of political liberty. But she becomes thevictim of a concept of politics that is inapplicable to modernconditions when she asserts that theintrusion of social and economic matters into the public realm,the transformation of government into administration, the re-17 Ibid., p. 33.Scanned Page Image p. 14

COMMUNICATIONS 15placement of personal rule by bureaucratic measures, and theattending transmutation of laws into decrees18necessarily frustrate every attempt at a politically active publicrealm. She also views the French Revolution in this dim light;and she attributes the initial success of the foundation ofliberty in America to the fact that "the politically insolublesocial question did not stand in the way."19 I cannot discussthis interpretation here.20 I want only to indicate the curiousperspective that Hannah Arendt adopts: a state which is re-lieved of the administrative processing of social problems; apolitics which is cleansed of socio-economic issues; an in-stitutionalization of public liberty which is independent of theorganization of public wealth; a radical democracy which in-hibits its liberating efficacy just at the boundaries where politi-cal oppression ceases and social repression begins - this path isunimaginable for any modern society.Thus we are faced with a dilemma: on the one hand, thecommunications concept of power discloses important thoughextreme phenomena of the modern world to which politicalscience has become more and more insensitive; on the otherhand, it is linked with a conception of politics which, whenapplied to modern societies, leads to absurdities. Let us thenreturn once more to the analysis of the concept of power.Arendt' s concept of communicatively generated power canbecome a sharp instrument only if we extricate it from theclamps of an Aristotelian theory of action. In separatingpraxis from the unpolitical activities of working and laboringon the one side and of thinking on the other, Arendt tracesback political power exclusively to praxis, to the speaking andacting together of individuals. Over against the production of18 Arendt, On Revolution, p. 86.19 Hannah Arendt, Uber die Revolution (Munich: R. Piper, 1963), p. 85; cf. OnRevolution, pp. 62 ff.20 Cf. my review "Die Geschichte von den zwei Revolutionen," in Jiirgen Habermas,Kulter und Kritik (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1973), pp. 365-370.Scanned Page Image p. 15

16 SOCIAL RESEARCHmaterial objects and theoretical knowledge, communicative ac-tion has to appear as the only political category. This narrow-ing of the political to the practical permits illuminating con-trasts to the presently palpable elimination of essentially prac-tical contents from the political process. But for this Arendtpays a certain price: (a) she screens all strategic elements, asforce, out of politics; (b) she removes politics from its relationsto the economic and social environment in which it is em-bedded through the administrative system; and (c) she is un-able to grasp structural violence. Let me comment briefly onthese three deficits.Strategic Competition for Political PowerWar is the classic example of strategic action. For the Greeksit was something that took place outside the walls of the city.For Hannah Arendt too strategic action is essentially unpoliti-cal, a matter for experts. The example of warfare is of coursesuited to demonstrating the contrast between political powerand force. Waging war manifestly involves the calculated em-ployment of means of force, whether for the sake of threaten-ing or of physically overcoming an opponent. But the accumu-lation of means of destruction does not make superpowersmore powerful; military strength is (as the Vietnam Warshowed) often enough the counterpart to impotence. Fur-thermore, the example of warfare seems suitable for subsum-ing strategic action under instrumental action. In addition tocommunicative action, the vita activa encompasses the essen-tially nonsocial activities of working and laboring. And sincethe purposive-rational employment of military means appearsto have the same structure as the use of instruments to fabri-cate material objects or to work up nature, Arendt equatesstrategic with instrumental action. So she stresses that strategicaction is instrumental as well as violent, and that action of thistype falls outside of the domain of the political.Scanned Page Image p. 16

COMMUNICATIONS 17The matter looks different if we place strategic actionalongside communicative action, as another form of socialinteraction (which is, to be sure, not oriented to reachingagreement but to success); and if we contrast it with instru-mental action, as nonsocial action that can also be carried outby a solitary subject. It then becomes conceptually plausiblethat strategic action also took place within the walls of thecity - thus in power struggles, in the competition for positionsto which the exercise of legitimate power was tied. The acquisi-tion and maintenance of political power must be distinguishedfrom both the employment of political power - that is, rule - andthe generation of political power. In the last case, but only inthe last case, the concept of praxis is helpful. No occupant of aposition of authority can maintain and exercise power, if thesepositions are not themselves anchored in laws and politicalinstitutions whose continued existence rests ultimately oncommon convictions, on "an opinion upon which many arepublicly in agreement."The elements of strategic action have undoubtedly in-creased in scope and importance in modern societies. With thecapitalist mode of production this action type, which in pre-modern societies dominated above all in foreign relations, alsobecame permissible within society as the normal case for eco-nomic relationships. Modern private law grants to all com-modity owners formally equivalent spheres of strategic action.Moreover, in the modern state which supplements this eco-nomic society, the struggle for political power is normalizedthrough the institutionalization of strategic action (throughthe admission of an opposition, through the competition ofparties and associations, through the legalization of laborstruggles, etc.). These phenomena of power acquisition andmaintenance have misled political theorists from Hobbes toSchumpeter to identify power with a potential for successfulstrategic action. Against this tradition (in which Max Weberalso stands), Arendt rightly urges that strategic contests forpolitical power neither call forth nor maintain those institu-Scanned Page Image p. 17

18 SOCIAL RESEARCHtions in which that power is anchored. Political institutions livenot from force but from recognition.Nevertheless, we cannot exclude the element of strategicaction from the concept of the political. Let us understand theforce exercised through strategic action as the ability to pre-vent other individuals or groups from realizing their inter-ests.21 In this sense force has always belonged to the means foracquiring and holding on to positions of legitimate power. Inmodern states this struggle for political power has even beeninstitutionalized; it thereby became a normal component ofthe political system. On the other hand, it is not at all clearthat someone should be able to generate legitimate power sim-ply because he is in a position to prevent others from pursuingtheir interests. Legitimate power arises only among those whoform common convictions in unconstrained communication.The Employment of Power in the Political SystemThe communicative production of power and the struggleor strategic competition for political power can be grasped interms of action-types; but for the employment of legitimatepower the action structures through which it is exercised arenot essential. Legitimate power permits the occupants of posi-tions of authority to make binding decisions. This employ-ment of power is of interest more from the vantagepoint ofsystems theory than from that of action theory. HannahArendt naturally resists leaving her action-theoretic frame-work in order to inject a functionalist analysis into it. Inher view, the sphere of human affairs is not to be distantiatedaccording to the standards of an objectivistic social science,because knowledge that is gained in this attitude cannot viaenlightenment flow back into the commonsense world. In thisrespect, Arendt would not draw any distinction even between21 Cf. my elaboration of this concept in Jiirgen Habermas and Niklas Luhmann,Theorie der Gesellschaft oder Sozialtechnologie (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1971), pp. 250-257.Scanned Page Image p. 18

COMMUNICATIONS 19Hegel and Parsons; both investigate historical and social pro-cesses that pass over the heads of those involved.22 She herselftries to capture this process aspect of social life in an actioncategory by differentiating between work and labor. Labordiffers from work not in the action structures themselves, butin the fact that the concept of "labor" represents productiveactivity as an expenditure of labor power which has to bereproduced, and is thus located in the functional context ofproduction, consumption, and reproduction. With her reser-vations, Arendt unnecessarily disadvantages herself vis-a-visthe systems analyses that are usual today. On the other hand,her mistrust is only too justified when systems theory is in turncut off from action theory.This can be seen in Parsons when, for instance, he discussesC. Wright Mills's zero-sum concept of power. Parsons wants tounderstand power as an augmentable good, like credit orbuying power. If one side gains political power, the other sideneed not lose any. A zero-sum game results only when differ-ent parties struggle for. available power positions, but not fromthe point of view of the rise and fall of the power of politicalinstitutions. Parsons and Arendt are in agreement on thispoint. But they have rather divergent ideas of the process ofpower generation. Parsons regards this process as a rise inactivity; it might be roughly sketched as follows: in order thaLthe output of the state apparatus can grow, the scope of actionof the administrative system has to be expanded; this in turnrequires a stronger input of rather unspecific support or massloyalty. Thus the process of power enhancement begins on theinput side. Political leaders must arouse new needs in theelectorate in order that increasing demands arise which can bemet only through heightened administrative activity.2322 Arendt, On Revolution, pp. 45 ff.23 Parsons, "On the Concept of Political Power," p. 340: "Collective leadership maythen be conceived as the bankers or 'brokers' who can mobilize the binding commit-ments of their constituents in such a way that the totality of commitments made by thecollectivity as a whole can be enhanced. . . . The problem then is that of a basis forbreaking through the circular stability of a zero-sum power system. The crucial pointScanned Page Image p. 19

20 SOCIAL RESEARCHFrom the systems perspective, the production of power ap-pears as a problem that can be solved by a stronger influenceon the will of the population exerted by the political leader-ship. To the extent that this takes place by means of psychicconstraint, by persuasion and manipulation, it amounts, inHannah Arendt's view, to an increase in force but not in thepower of the political system. For power can, on her assump-tion, arise only in the structures of unconstrained communica-tion; it cannot be generated "from above." Parsons would haveto dispute this hypothesis; given a set of cultural values, therecan be for him no structural limits to the production of power.On the other hand, in the light of peculiar cases of powerinflation and deflation, Parsons would very much like to beable to differentiate between serious and unserious powercredits:There is a fine line between solid, responsible and constructivepolitical leadership which in fact commits the collectivity beyondits capacities for instantaneous fulfillment of all obligations, andreckless overextendedness, just as there is a fine line betweenresponsible banking and "wildcatting."24But it is difficult to see how this "fine line" could be conceivedin terms of Parsons's own systems theory. Hannah Arendtoffers a solution precisely to this problem. She attempts toderive from the structures of unimpaired intersubjectivity theconditions of the public- political realm that must be met ifpower is to be communicatively engendered or expanded.is that this can only happen if the collectivity and its members are ready to assumenew binding obligations over and above those previously in force. The crucial need isto justify this extension and to transform the 'sentiment' that something ought to bedone into a commitment to implement the sentiment by positive action, includingcoercive sanctions if necessary. The crucial agency of this process seems to be leader-ship, precisely conceived as possessing a component analytically independent of theroutine power position of office, which defines the leader as the mobilizer of justifica-tion for policies."24 Ibid., p. 342.Scanned Page Image p. 20

COMMUNICATIONS 21The Communicative Production of Power-A VariationLet us summarize the two points of criticism. The conceptof the political must extend to the strategic competition forpolitical power and to the employment of power within thepolitical system. Politics cannot, as with Arendt, be identifiedwith the praxis of those who talk together in order to act incommon. Conversely, the dominant theory narrows this con-cept to phenomena of political competition and power alloca-tion and does not do justice to the real phenomenon of thegeneration of power. At this point the distinction betweenpower and force becomes sharp. It calls to mind that thepolitical system cannot dispose of power at will. Power is agood for which political groups struggle and with which apolitical leadership manages things; but in a certain way bothfind this good already at hand; they don't produce it. This isthe impotence of the powerful - they have to borrow theirpower from the producers of power. This is the credo ofHannah Arendt.The objection thereto lies ready at hand: even if the leader-ship in modern democracies has to periodically procurelegitimation, history is replete with evidence which shows thatpolitical rule must have functioned, and functions, otherwisethan as Arendt claims. Certainly, it speaks for her thesis thatpolitical rule can last only so long as it is recognized as legiti-mate. It speaks against her thesis that basic institutions andstructures which are stabilized through political rule couldonly in rare cases be the expression of an "opinion on whichmany were publicly in agreement" - at least if one has, asHannah Arendt does, a strong concept of the public realm.These two facts can be brought together if we assume thatstructural violence is built into political institutions (but notonly into them). Structural violence does not manifest itself asforce; rather, unperceived, it blocks those communications inwhich convictions effective for legitimation are formed andScanned Page Image p. 21

22 SOCIAL RESEARCHpassed on. Such an hypothesis about inconspicuously workingcommunication blocks can explain, perhaps, the formation ofideologies; with it one can give a plausible account of howconvictions are formed in which subjects deceive themselvesabout themselves and their situation. Ideologies are, after all,illusions that are outfitted with the power of common convic-tions. This proposal is an attempt to render the communica-tive production of power in a more realistic version. In sys-tematically restricted communications, those involved formconvictions subjectively free from constraint, convictionswhich are, however, illusionary. They thereby communica-tively generate a power which, as soon as it is institutionalized,can also be used against them.If we wanted to accept this proposal, we would of coursehave to specify a critical standard and to distinguish betweenillusionary and nonillusionary convictions. Hannah Arendtdoubts that this is possible. She holds fast to the classicaldistinction between theory and practice; practice rests on opin-ions and convictions that cannot be true or false in the strictsense:No opinion is self-evident. In matters of opinion, but not inmatters of truth, our thinking is truly discursive, running as itwere, from place to place, from one part of the world to theother through all kinds of conflicting views, until it finally as-cends from all these particularities to some impartial general-ity.25An antiquated concept of theoretical knowledge that is basedon ultimate insights and certainties keeps Arendt from com-prehending the process of reaching agreement about practicalquestions as rational discourse. If, by contrast, "representativethought"26 - which examines the generalizability of practical25 Hannah Arendt, "Truth and Politics," in Peter Laslett and W. G. Runciman, eds.,Philosophy, Politics and Society, 3rd series (Oxford: Blackwell, 1967), pp. 115 ff.26 "Political thought is representative. I form an opinion by considering a givenissue from different viewpoints, by making present to my mind the standpoints ofthose who are absent, that is, represent them. This process of representation does notScanned Page Image p. 22

COMMUNICATIONS 23standpoints, that is, the legitimacy of norms - is not separatedfrom argumentation by an abyss, then a cognitive foundationcan also be claimed for the power of common convictions. Inthis case, such power is anchored in the de facto recognitionof validity claims that can be discursively redeemed and fun-damentally criticized. Arendt sees a yawning abyss betweenknowledge and opinion that cannot be closed with arguments.She has to look for another foundation for the power ofopinion, and she finds it in the capability of responsible sub-jects to make and to keep promises.We mentioned before the power generated when people gathertogether and "act in concert," which disappears the momentthey depart. The force that keeps them together ... is the forceof mutual promise or contract.27She regards as the basis of power the contract between freeand equal parties with which they place themselves undermutual obligation. To secure the normative core of an originalblindly adopt the actual views of those who stand somewhere else and hence lookupon the world from a different perspective; this is a question neither of empathy, asthough I tried to be or feel like somebody else, nor of counting noses and joining amajority, but of being and thinking in my own identity where actually I am not. Themore people's standpoints I have present in my mind while pondering a given issueand the better I can imagine how I would feel and think if I were in their place, thestronger will be my capacity for representative thinking and the more valid my finalconclusions, my opinion. (It is this capacity for an 'enlarged mentality' that enablesmen to judge; as such, it was discovered by Kant - in the first part of his Critique ofJudgment - who, however, did not recognize the political and moral implications of hisdiscovery.) The very process of opinion- formation is determined by those in whoseplaces somebody thinks and uses his own mind, and the only condition for thisexertion of imagination is disinterestedness, the liberation from one's own privateinterests. Hence, even if I shun all company or am completely isolated while formingan opinion, I am not simply together only with myself in the solitude of philosophicthought; I remain in this world of mutual interdependence where I can make myselfthe representative of everybody else. To be sure, I can refuse to do this and form anopinion that takes only my own interest, or the interests of the group to which Ibelong, into account; nothing indeed is more common, even among highly sophisti-cated people, than this blind obstinacy which becomes manifest in lack of imaginationand failure to judge. But the very quality of an opinion as of a judgment dependsupon its degree of impartiality" (Arendt, "Truth and Politics," p. 115).27 Arendt, The Human Condition, pp. 244 ff.Scanned Page Image p. 23

24 SOCIAL RESEARCHequivalence between power and freedom, Hannah Arendtfinally places more trust in the venerable figure of the con-tract than in her own concept of a praxis, which is groundedin the rationality of practical judgment.28 She retreats insteadto the contract theory of natural law.Translated by Thomas McCarthy28 Cf. R. J. Bernstein, "H. Arendt: Opinion and Judgment," paper presented to theAnnual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, Chicago, 1976.Scanned Page Image p. 24


